# Major-Project_Prediction-of-Flight-Delays

Flight delay is studied vigorously in various research in recent years. The growing demand for air travel has led to an increase in flight delays. According to the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA), the aviation industry loses more than $3 billion in a year due to flight delays [1] and, as per BTS, in 2016 there were 860,646 arrival delays. The reasons for the delay of commercial scheduled flights are air traffic congestion, passengers increasing per year, maintenance and safety problems, adverse weather conditions, the late arrival of plane to be used for next flight. In the United States, the FAA believes that a flight is delayed when the scheduled and actual arrival times differs by more than 15 minutes. Since it becomes a serious problem in the United States, analysis and prediction of flight delays are being studied to reduce large costs.

To predict flight delays to train models, we have collected data accumulated by the Bureau of Transportation; U.S. Statistics of all the domestic flights taken in 2015 was used. The US Bureau of Transport Statistics provides statistics of arrival and departure that includes actual departure time, scheduled departure time, and scheduled elapsed time, wheels-off time, departure delay and taxi-out time per airport. Cancellation and Rerouting by the airport and the airline with the date and time and flight labeling along with airline airborne time are also provided. The data set consists of 25 columns and 59986 rows. The figure shows some of the fields of the original dataset. There were many lines with missing and null values. The data must be pre-processed for later use. The methodology here uses the supervised learning technique to gather the advantages of having the schedule and real arrival time. Initially, some specific monitoring algorithms with a light computation cost were considered candidates and therefore the best candidate was perfected for the final model. We develop a system that predicts for a delay in flight departure based on certain parameters. We train our model for forecasting using various attributes of a particular flight, such as arrival performances, flight summaries, origin/destination, etc.

The conclusions of this project are:
Machine learning algorithms were applied progressively and successively to predict flight arrival & delay. We built five models out of this. We saw for each evaluation metric considered the values of the models and compared them. 
We found out that: 
-In Departure Delay, Random Forest Regressor was observed as the best model with Mean Squared Error 2261.8 and Mean Absolute Error 24.1, which are the minimum value found in these respective metrics. 
In Arrival Delay, Random Forest Regressor was the best model observed with Mean Squared Error 3019.3 and Mean Absolute Error 30.8, which are the minimum value found in these respective metrics.
In the rest of the metrics, the value of the error of Random Forest Regressor although is not minimum but still gives a low value comparatively. In maximum metrics, we found out that Random Forest Regressor gives us the best value and thus should be the model selected.
